# Chapter 3 - Installing Docker

Docker's installation process varies depending on the operating system used, as well as that OS's distribution.
Since Docker is built around Linux containers, use of a virtual machine or remote server will be required if you
wish to use Docker on any other OS (Note: This is no longer true).

This chapter will cover setting up a Docker environment on most modern OSs, firstly installing the client to your
host system, then by getting a Docker server running on Linux.
 
(Note: At the time of writing this book) The Docker client can run on Mac OS X and Windows and can be used to
issue commands to a Docker server, but Docker containers can only be built and launced on Linux.

## Important Terminology

- __Docker client__:
    The `docker` command used to control most of the Docker workflow and to talk to remote Docker servers.
- __Docker server__:
    The `docker` command run in daemon mode. This turns a Linux system into a Docker server that can have
    containers deployed, launched and torn down via a remote client.
- __Docker images__:
    Docker images consist of one or more filesystem layers as well as some important metadata that together
    represent all the files required to run a Dockerised application.
- __Docker container__:
    A Docker container is a Linux container that has been instantiated from a Docker image. Containers are
    disposable - a specific container can only exist once, but more can be created from the Docker image.
    Typically a container will have both a name and a tag. The tag is used to identify the image's particular
    __release.__
- __Atomic Host__:
    An atomic host is a small, finely tuned operating system image (such as CoreOS or Project Atomic) that
    supports container hosting and atomic OS upgrades.
    
## Docker Client

The Docker client natively supports __64-bit__ versions of Mac OS X and Linux since both operating systems
are built upon Unix.

Most popular Linux distributions are either built upon __Debian__ or __Red Hat.__ Debian uses the __deb__
package format and utilises the __Advanced Package Tool (apt)__ to install most prepackaged software,
while Red Hat uses __Red Hat Package Manager (rpm)__ files and __Yellowdog Updater, Modified (yum)__ for
installation.

On Mac OS X, Homebrew is a popular installation option, or you could just use the GUI, as with Windows.

### Linux

It is advisable to use the most modern stable release of your chosen Linux distribution; a kernel of 3.8
or later is required in order to install Docker.

#### Ubuntu Linux 14.04 (64-bit)

Run the following commands to install Docker:    
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install docker.io
sudo ln -sf /usr/bin/docker.io /usr/local/bin/docker
```

then, for optional auto-completion:
```
sudo sed -i '$acomplete -F _docker docker' /etc/bash_completion.d/docker.io
source /etc/bash_completion.d/docker.io
```

#### Fedora Linux 21 (64-bit)

Run the following commands to install Docker:
```
sudo yum -y install docker-io
```

### Mac OSX 10.10