# Chapter 2: Stray Observations

- Don't worry, Docker isn't complicated! That's so good to know /s. 

### Process Simplification
- This cycle seems a little contrived.
- Is this really how things work? I'm having trouble visualising a system where a developer can't just install
any dependencies they want. Does this apply to large companies where the app is business-critical and they
can't risk installing a dependency that breaks things? Or are they talking about internally created dependencies?
In which case I suppose it would be the Ops team's job to be caretakers of all the services the company is creating
and supply them as needed.
- Yet again a guide says simply "and then the app is deployed". HOW is an app deployed? Why haven't I encountered
this yet?
- I'm starting to think that I'm grossly underestimating the role dependency management plays in software
development.
- Perhaps it's time to have another look at systems like Heroku? Of course I'd rather learn how to set up a
deployment pipeline on my own, though. Also I think you have to pay in order to use those systems for production
level apps?
- Why do I still find myself forgetting or becoming unsure of basic things, like the fact that the image
is a definition of the application itself, not just the underlying architecture. Containers are instantiations
of these images. The image is sort of like the DNA of the app, while containers represent actual living creatures.
- I suppose part of the reason I haven't encountered any mention of application deployment is that all the apps I've
been considering to be the finished article are actually just the raw materials an Ops engineer will feed to 
whatever deployment system they have configured - once the system is set up it potentially doesn't matter what is
fed to it, and it stops being of interest when talking about specific applications.
- I'm not sure what the Ops team's role is in the revised cycle - what is involved in configuring the container 
and provisioning resources? And how does this mean that devs can now be the ones to trigger deployment?
- Presumably in the past it was no minor task to 'discover' all of an app's dependencies between the testing and
production stages. This seems really sloppy???

### Broad Support and Adoption
- I reaaally don't know anything about cloud deployment. Would be good to learn more though, as long as I don't
lose focus.
- Keep in mind that this book is 2 or 3 years old.

### Architecture
- Paragraphs like this remind me of just how much I have to learn :(

### Client/Server Model
- What is 'a binary'? I guess it's the final packaged form of a piece of software? (It's a non-text file)
- Transmission Control Protocol is a standard which defines which applications can exchange data.
- What is IANA? I'm guessing it's a centralised registry for TCP ports.  


### Container Networking
- Would disabling Docker's default virtual network expose the containers to the outside world?


### Getting the most from Docker
- This book was written 3 years ago, before the community had solved the problem of Dockerising stateful applications.
I think the problem was that Docker containers are supposed to be highly portable, but stored data is not.
The break through, I think, was in linking volumes to containers - you can set up a centralised data store and
link any container to it.

# New Vocabulary/Terms
- automated deployment
- distributed scheduling
- network layer
- bridge (network): A network device that repeats traffic from one side to the other. I guess Docker isolates
its containers, and then needs a way to allow them to reach each other.
- subnet: A logical subdivision of an IP network. 
- private subnet
- idempotence: performing a function multiple times has the same effect as performing it once
- hypervisor: software, firmware or hardware that creates and runs virtual machines
- SHA: Secure Hash Algorithm